Blog about io_thread performance contribution (#98)
valkey-io/valkey-io.github.io: content/blog/2024-07-07-aws-to-contribute-efficiency-improvements-for-ValKey-8.md

+++
# `title` is how your post will be listed and what will appear at the top of the post

> title=  "AWS to Contribute Efficiency Improvements to Valkey 8 "

Reviewer: I also don't think this is a great title. "AWS contributes significant performance improvement to Valkey 8", seems a lot more exciting.

# `date` is when your post will be published.
# For the most part, you can leave this as the day you _started_ the post.
# The maintainers will update this value before publishing
# The time is generally irrelvant in how Valkey published, so '01:01:01' is a good placeholder
date= 2024-07-08 01:01:01
# 'description' is what is shown as a snippet/summary in various contexts.
# You can make this the first few lines of the post or (better) a hook for readers.
# Aim for 2 short sentences.
description= "Better efficiency reduces cost, improves latency and makes our environment greener"
# 'authors' are the folks who wrote or contributed to the post.
# Each author corresponds to a biography file (more info later in this document)
authors= [ "dantouitou", "uriyagelnik"]
+++
## AWS to Contribute Efficiency Improvements for Valkey 8

> From simple in-memory caching implementations to complex job queues, real-time collaboration, and leaderboards applications, we at AWS are continually amazed by how innovatively users employ Valkey. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From simple in-memory caching implementations to complex job queues, real-time collaboration, and leaderboard applications, we at AWS are continually amazed by how innovatively users employ Valkey. 
```

> Clearly, this is just the tip of the iceberg. As more use cases and industries want to  benefit from the speed, low latency, and cost reduction advantages of in-memory processing as introduced by Valkey, we are fully committed to this vision.

Reviewer: Maybe just need to modify the wording to better indicate that the vision is performance.

> ### Our Commitment to Efficiency

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Our Commitment to Performance Efficiency
```
We have two efficiency threads, memory density and performance, I think we should be clear about which one we're optimizing here.

One of our primary goals at AWS is to ensure our customers receive the most efficient services. Efficiency not only leads to lower costs, better latency and a greener environment, but also enhances resilience.

For example, take the fork-based snapshotting and replication process. The longer it takes, the more memory is consumed by copied-on-write pages and the replica output buffer, often resulting in high swapping and erratic behavior. By reducing execution time, one can achieve a more predictable memory usage and greater stability.

### Major Upgrade to Valkey Performance

> We are excited about the new Linux Foundation sponsorship for Valkey and are taking a bigger step, contributing our major performance improvements and expertise. Starting with version 8, Valkey users will benefit from a breakthrough in performance, thanks to a new multi-threading implementation that can can considerably boost performance on a wide range of hardware types. 

Reviewer 2: What is LF to us actually? In Swedish there's a word "huvudman" for this but in English I don't know if there is a good word. Our authority?

> We are excited about the new Linux Foundation sponsorship for Valkey and are taking a bigger step, contributing our major performance improvements and expertise. Starting with version 8, Valkey users will benefit from a breakthrough in performance, thanks to a new multi-threading implementation that can can considerably boost performance on a wide range of hardware types. 

Reviewer: I don't think there is a word for it. They own the trademarks and IP and provide us tooling to manage the project. Which is common for a lot of foundations.

> We are excited about the new Linux Foundation sponsorship for Valkey and are taking a bigger step, contributing our major performance improvements and expertise. Starting with version 8, Valkey users will benefit from a breakthrough in performance, thanks to a new multi-threading implementation that can can considerably boost performance on a wide range of hardware types. 

Reviewer 2: It'd be good to have a simple way to talk about this relation though. What words are we using informally?

* V is backed by LF?
* V is hosted by LF?
* V is under LF?
* V is an LF project?

> We are excited about the new Linux Foundation sponsorship for Valkey and are taking a bigger step, contributing our major performance improvements and expertise. Starting with version 8, Valkey users will benefit from a breakthrough in performance, thanks to a new multi-threading implementation that can can considerably boost performance on a wide range of hardware types. 

Reviewer 3: @zuiderkwast I think 'hosted' is the LF term based on this: https://www.linuxfoundation.org/projects/hosting

'Hosted' is a bit overloaded; it makes me think of the LF running the servers more than 'hosting' our trademarks.

> We are excited about the new Linux Foundation sponsorship for Valkey and are taking a bigger step, contributing our major performance improvements and expertise. Starting with version 8, Valkey users will benefit from a breakthrough in performance, thanks to a new multi-threading implementation that can can considerably boost performance on a wide range of hardware types. 

Reviewer 2: Yeah, my first thought is that our repos are hosted on github. You should borrow the word Huvudman, just like English has ombudsman from Swedish.

> We are excited about the new Linux Foundation sponsorship for Valkey and are taking a bigger step, contributing our major performance improvements and expertise. Starting with version 8, Valkey users will benefit from a breakthrough in performance, thanks to a new multi-threading implementation that can can considerably boost performance on a wide range of hardware types. 

Reviewer 2: literally it means head-person.

> We are excited about the new Linux Foundation sponsorship for Valkey and are taking a bigger step, contributing our major performance improvements and expertise. Starting with version 8, Valkey users will benefit from a breakthrough in performance, thanks to a new multi-threading implementation that can can considerably boost performance on a wide range of hardware types. 

Reviewer 3: I'm all for English borrowing from Swedish.

My Swedish is rusty: Would 'huvudman' be used in a context for an organization?

> We are excited about the new Linux Foundation sponsorship for Valkey and are taking a bigger step, contributing our major performance improvements and expertise. Starting with version 8, Valkey users will benefit from a breakthrough in performance, thanks to a new multi-threading implementation that can can considerably boost performance on a wide range of hardware types. 

Reviewer 2: Yes, typically the government, foundations and things like that are huvudman for things. Example: The huvudman for the public school is the municipality. (Don't ask my why it's called that way though.)

> We are excited about the new Linux Foundation sponsorship for Valkey and are taking a bigger step, contributing our major performance improvements and expertise. Starting with version 8, Valkey users will benefit from a breakthrough in performance, thanks to a new multi-threading implementation that can can considerably boost performance on a wide range of hardware types. 

Reviewer 2: It's not a very common word so you're excused. :D

> For caching workloads, Valkey users will be able to increase maximum requests per second to over 1 million on multi-core machines such as AWS EC2  r7g.4xl

Reviewer: We need to couch this statement as well, because in OSS we talk a lot about pipeline performance, and Valkey can already do 1M+ RPS per process with batching.

> For caching workloads, Valkey users will be able to increase maximum requests per second to over 1 million on multi-core machines such as AWS EC2  r7g.4xl

Reviewer 2: I suggest running the same benchmark, same hardware, with and without these patches to to show the difference. (Or compare to Valkey 7.2.5 to include other optimizations too, but then with some attribution to others too.)

### Benefits of High Capacity Shards

Valkey's common approach for performance and memory increase is by scaling out, i.e.,
adding more shards to the cluster. The availability of more powerful nodes adds another dimension
of flexibility when designing applications. 

First, higher-capacity shards enable the deployment of clusters
with larger capacity and greater resilience to request surges. Additionally, for applications requiring multi-key
transactions, more powerful shards simplify key distribution when designing the application by allowing a higher
concentration of slots in a single shard. Finally, higher-capacity shards handling requests for a larger number
of slots are more effective in load balancing resources during arbitrary increases in load on random slots.
This reduces the need for costly over-provisioning.

### Performance Without Compromising Simplicity

> Implementing multi-threading  can be a complex task. Over the years, contributors have been careful to maintain Redis’ and now Valkey’s simplicity . This ensures an API  that can continuously evolve without the need to use complex synchronization and avoid race conditions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Implementing multi-threading can be a complex task.
Valkey strives to stay simple by executing as much code in a single thread as possible.
This ensures an API that can continuously evolve without the need to use complex synchronization and avoid race conditions. 
```

We designed our new multi-threading approach to delight Valkey users with intuitive simplicity. It utilizes a minimal number of synchronization mechanisms and keeps Valkey command execution single-threaded, simple, and primed for future enhancements.

![io_threads high level design](/assets/media/pictures/io_threads.png)

### High Level Design 

> The above diagram depicts the io_threads implementation from a high-level perspective. Io_threads are stateless worker threads that receive jobs to execute from the main thread. In Valkey 8, a job can involve reading and parsing a command from a client, writing back responses to the client, polling for IO events on TCP connections, or de-allocating memory. This leaves the main thread with more time to execute  commands. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above diagram depicts the high-level design of how IO threading processes work in Valkey 8.
IO threads are worker threads that receive jobs to execute from the main thread.
A job can involve reading and parsing a command from a client, writing back responses to the client, polling for IO events on TCP connections, or de-allocating memory.
While IO threads are busy handling IO, the main thread is able to spend more time executing commands. 
```

> The above diagram depicts the io_threads implementation from a high-level perspective. Io_threads are stateless worker threads that receive jobs to execute from the main thread. In Valkey 8, a job can involve reading and parsing a command from a client, writing back responses to the client, polling for IO events on TCP connections, or de-allocating memory. This leaves the main thread with more time to execute  commands. 

Reviewer 2: They're usually called "I/O threads" in text. No need to use the C struct name.

> The above diagram depicts the io_threads implementation from a high-level perspective. Io_threads are stateless worker threads that receive jobs to execute from the main thread. In Valkey 8, a job can involve reading and parsing a command from a client, writing back responses to the client, polling for IO events on TCP connections, or de-allocating memory. This leaves the main thread with more time to execute  commands. 

Reviewer 3: I would be fine with that @zuiderkwast

> The main thread orchestrates all the jobs spawned to the io_threads, ensuring that no race conditions occur. Io_threads can be easily added and removed by the main thread based on the current load to ensure efficient utilization of the underlying hardware. Despite the dynamic nature of io_threads, the main thread attempts to maintain thread affinity, ensuring that the same io_thread will handle IO for the same client to improve memory access locality. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main thread orchestrates all the jobs spawned to the IO threads, ensuring that no race conditions occur.
The number of active IO threads can be changed by the main thread based on the current load to ensure efficient utilization of the underlying hardware.
Despite the dynamic nature of IO threads, the main thread attempts to maintain thread affinity, ensuring that the same IO thread will handle IO for the same client to improve memory access locality. 
```

Reviewer 2: "IO threads" or "I/O threads"?

Wikipedia says

> input/output (I/O, i/o, or informally io or IO)

Reviewer: Sure, I'll update all my suggestions to I/O threads.

> Before executing commands, the main thread performs a new procedure, prefetch-commands-keys, which aims to reduce the number of external memory accesses needed when executing the commands on the main dictionary. A detailed explanation of the technique used in that procedure will be described in our next blog. 

Reviewer: I would consider dropping this whole paragraph, since it's missing from the current set of PRs. We can produce blogs as necessary talking about our performance improvements.

> Socket polling system calls, such as epoll_wait, are expensive procedures. When executed solely by the main thread, epoll_wait consumes more than 20 percent of the time. Therefore, we decided to offload epoll_wait execution to the io_threads in the following way: to avoid race conditions, at any time, at most one thread, either an io_thread or the main thread, is executing epoll_wait. Io_threads never sleep on epoll, and whenever there are pending IO operations or commands to be executed, epoll_wait calls are scheduled to the io_threads by the main thread. In all other cases, the main thread executes the epoll_wait with the waiting time as in the original Valkey implementation 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Socket polling system calls, such as epoll_wait, are expensive procedures.
When executed solely by the main thread, epoll_wait consumes more than 20 percent of the CPU time of the process.
Therefore, we offload `epoll_wait` execution to the IO thread when necessary by scheduling an epoll job from the main thread to an IO thread.
To avoid race conditions, the main thread will no longer execute `epoll_wait` until the poll job has completed, ensuring that only one thread is executing the `epoll_wait` at a given time.
```
